yardley's appropriation had been severely cut in 1924, and half thestaff had to be let go,
reducing the force to about a dozen. despite this,yardley said, the black chamber managed to
solve, from 1917 to 1929,more than 45,000 telegrams, involving the codes of argentina,
brazil,chile, china, costa rica, cuba, england, france, germany, japan,liberia, mexico, nicaragua,
panama, peru, san salvador, santo domingo(later the dominican republic) the soviet union, and
spain and madepreliminary analyses of many other codes, including those of the vatican.suddenly
it all ended. yardley, who had been obtaining the codetelegrams of foreign governments through
the cooperation of thepresidents of the western union telegraph company and the
postaltelegraph company, was encountering increasing resistance from them.herbert hoover had
just been inaugurated, and yardley resolved to settle the matter with the new
administration once and for all. hedecided on the bold stroke of drawing up "a memorandum to
bepresented directly to the president, outlining the history and activities ofthe black
chamber, and the necessary steps that must be taken if thegovernment had hoped to take full
advantage of the skill of itscryptographers." he waited to see which way the wind was blowing
beforemaking his move—and found that it was not with him. yardley went to aspeakeasy to listen
to hoover's first speech as president and sensed, inthe high ethical strictures that
hoover expressed, the doom of the blackchamber.he was right, though its actual closing came
from elsewhere. afterhenry l. stimson, hoover's secretary of state, had been in office the
fewmonths that yardley thought would be necessary for him to have lostsome of his innocence
in wrestling with the hardheaded realities ofdiplomacy, the black chamber sent him the
solution of an importantseries of messages. but stimson was different from previous
secretariesof state, on whom this tactic had always worked. he was shocked tolearn of the
existence of the black chamber, and totally disapproved of it.he regarded it as a low, snooping
activity, a sneaking, spying, keyhole-peering kind of dirty business, a violation of the
principle of mutual trustupon which he conducted both his personal affairs and his
foreignpolicy. all of this it is, and stimson rejected the view that such meansjustified
even patriotic ends. he held to the conviction that his countryshould do what is right,
and, as he said later, "gentlemen do not readeach other's mail." in an act of pure moral courage,
stimson, affirmingprinciple over expediency, withdrew all state department funds from
thesupport of the black chamber.* since these constituted its majorincome, their loss
shuttered the office. hoover's speech had warnedyardley that an appeal would be fruitless.
there was nothing to do butclose up shop.in 1940, as secretary of war, he had to reverse
himself and acceptthe cryptanalyses of magic. but the international situation then
wastotally different. "in 1929," he himself has written, in the third person,"the world was
striving with good will for lasting peace, and in this effortall the nations were parties.
stimson, as secretary of state, was dealingas a gentleman with the gentlemen sent as ambassadors
and ministersfrom friendly nations. ..." in 1940, europe was at war, and the unitedstates was
on the verge.the signal corps, where william friedman had charge of cryptology.the staff quickly
dispersed (none went to the army), and when the bookswere closed on october 31, 1929, the
american black chamber hadperished. it had cost the state department $230,404 and the
wardepartment $98,808.49—just under a third of a million dollars for adecade of cryptanalyis.
yardley, whose job experience had been rather specialized, could notfind work, and he went back
home to worthington. the depressionsucked him dry. by august of 1930, he had had to give up
an apartmenthouse and a one-eighth interest in a real estate corporation; indeed,
hecomplained that he had to sell nearly everything he owned "for less thannothing." a few
months later he was toying with the idea of writing thestory of the black chamber to make some
money to feed his wife andtheir son, jack. when his old mi-8 friend, manly, with whom he hadbeen
in contact all during the 1920's, had to turn down his request for a$2,500 loan at the end of
january, 1931, yardley, in desperation, satdown to write what was to be the most famous book on
cryptology everpublished.